Global warming is the current rise in temperature of the air and oceans. It is happening mainly because humans burn coal, oil, and natural gas; and cut down forests.[2] Average temperatures today are about 1 °C (1.8 °F) higher than before people started burning a lot of coal around 1750.[3] In some parts of the world it is less, and in some, more. Most climate scientists say that by the year 2100, temperatures will be 2 °C (3.6 °F) to 4 °C (7.2 °F) higher than they were before 1750.[4]

Global warming is a significant and rapidly accelerating issue caused by human activities, such as greenhouse gas emissions, deforestation, and the burning of fossil fuels. It is having a profound impact on the environment and our planet. The present global warming is mostly because of people burning things, like gasoline for cars and natural gas to keep houses warm. But the heat from the burning itself only makes the world a tiny bit warmer: it is the carbon dioxide from the burning which is the biggest part of the problem. Among greenhouse gases, the increase of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere is the main cause of global warming. Svante Arrhenius predicted this more than a hundred years ago. Arrhenius confirmed the work of Joseph Fourier 200 years ago.

When people burn fossil fuels like coal, oil and natural gas this adds carbon dioxide into the air.[5] This is because fossil fuels contain lots of carbon and burning means joining most of the atoms in the fuel with oxygen. When people cut down many trees (deforestation), this means less carbon dioxide is taken out of the atmosphere by those plants. Animals which have four places in their stomachs, like cows and sheep, also cause global warming, because their burps contain a greenhouse gas called methane.[6]

As the Earth's surface temperature becomes hotter the sea level rises. This is partly because water over 4 °C (39 °F) expands when it gets warmer.[7] It is also partly because warm temperatures make glaciers and ice caps melt. The sea level rise causes coastal areas to flood.[8] Weather patterns, including where and how much rain or snow there is, are changing. Deserts will probably get bigger. Colder areas will warm up faster than warm areas. Strong storms may become more likely and farming may not make as much food. These changes will not be the same everywhere.[9]

In the Paris Agreement almost all governments agreed to keep temperature rise below 2 °C (3.6 °F), but current plans are not enough to limit global warming that much.[10] People in government and the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) are talking about global warming. But governments, companies, and other people do not agree on what to do about it. Some things that could reduce warming are to burn less fossil fuels, grow more trees, eat less meat, and put some carbon dioxide back in the ground. People could adapt to some temperature change. A few people think nothing should change.


The  continuous  rise  in  temperature  of  the  planet  is really  upsetting.  The  root  cause  for  this  is  global warming.    Global  warming  begins  when  sunlight reaches  the  Earth.  The  clouds,  atmospheric  particles, reflective  ground surfaces  and  surface of  oceans  then sends back about 30 % of sunlight back into the space, whilst  the  remaining  is  absorbed  by  oceans,  air  and land.  This  consequently  heats  up  the  surface  of  the planet  and  atmosphere,  making  life  feasible.  As  the Earth warms up, this solar energy is radiated by thermal radiation and  infrared rays, propagating directly out to space thereby cooling the Earth. However, some of the outgoing  radiation  is  re-absorbed  by  carbon  dioxide, water  vapours, ozone,  methane and other  gases in  the atmosphere and is radiated back to the surface of Earth. These gases are commonly known as greenhouse gases due to their heat-trapping capacity. It must be noted that this re-absorption process is actually good as the Earth’s average surface temperature would be very cold if there was  no  existence  of  greenhouse  gases.  The  dilemma began  when the  concentration  of  greenhouse gases  in the atmosphere was artificially increased by humankind at an alarming rate since  the past  two centuries.  As of 2004, over 8 billion tons of carbon dioxide was pumped thermal radiation is further hindered by increased levels of greenhouse gases resulting in a phenomenon known as  human  enhanced  global  warming  effect.  Recent observations  regarding  global  warming  have substantiated  the  theory  that  it  is  indeed  a  human enhanced greenhouse effect that is causing the planet to heat up. The planet has experienced the largest increase in surface temperature over the last 100 years. Between 1906 and 2006, the Earth’s average surface temperature augmented between 0.6 to 0.9 degrees Celsius, however the last 50 years saw the  rate of  temperature increase nearly doubling. Sea levels have shown a rise of about 0.17  meters  during  the  20th  century.  The  extent  of Arctic sea ice has steadily reduced by 2.7 % per decade since 1978 [1].          out  per  year. Millions  of  pounds of  methane  gas  are generated in landfills and agricultural decomposition of biomass and  animal manure. Nitrous oxide  is released into  the  atmosphere  by  various  nitrogen-based fertilizers  including  urea  and  diammonium  phosphate and other soil  management utilizations. Once released, these  greenhouse  gases  stay  in  the  atmosphere  for decades  or  even  longer.  According  to Intergovernmental  Panel  on  Climate  Change  (IPCC), carbon dioxide and methane levels have increased by 35 % and 148 % since the industrial revolution of 1750.   II. Greenhouse Effect While other planets in the solar system of the Earth are either roasting hot  or bitterly cold,  Earth's surface has  relatively mild,  steady  temperatures. Earth  enjoys these temperatures because of its atmosphere,  which is the  thin  layer  of  gases  that  cover  and  protect  the planet. However, 97  %  of  climate  scientists  and researchers agree that humans have changed the Earth's atmosphere  in  dramatic  ways  over  the  past  two centuries,  resulting  in global warming.  To  understand global warming, it is first necessary to become familiar with the greenhouse effect. As Fig.1 depicts, the natural greenhouse effect  normally traps some portion  of heat in  such  a  way  that  our  planet  is  safe  from  reaching freezing  temperatures  while  human  enhanced greenhouse effect leads to global warming. This is due to burning of fossil fuels which increase the amount of greenhouse gases (carbon dioxide, methane and oxides of nitrogen) present in the atmosphere [2].